docs: Add guidelines for e2e tests (#1466)
cosmos/interchain-security: tests/e2e/README.md

# End-to-end testing

This folder contains end-to-end tests and related infrastructure.
The goal of end-to-end tests is to test our application completely.
End-to-end in this context means tests
where the whole app (including command line interfaces, interfaces to external components like
relayers, CometBFT, etc) is in scope for testing.

> The high-level overview of what a single test case does is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At a high-level, every test case consists of the following steps.
```

* The test starts a docker container, see [the startup script](testnet-scripts/start-docker.sh)
* We run a defined sequence of actions and expected states, see as an example the steps for [testing the democracy module](steps_democracy.go)

>     * Actions are things like: submitting transactions to a node, but also things like making nodes double-sign, starting a relayer, starting a new chain, ..., in short anything
> that might modify the system state meaningfully

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Actions are any event that might meaningfully modify the system state, such as submitting transactions to a node, making nodes double-sign, starting a relayer, starting a new chain, etc.
```

    * Expected states defined as parts of the system state that have to match. For example, after an action that modifies validator balances, we would specify
    the validator balances, so those would be checked against the actual validator balances. We might not care about the governance proposals that are on chain

>     though, and just leave that part of the state unspecified.

Reviewer: This is unclear.

Author: I reformulated this, could you recheck whether it is clearer?

* After each action, the state of the system is queried and compared against the expected state.

## Defining a new test case

This section explains how to define a new test case. For now, let's assume that

> all actions and state checks we want to perform already exist (see (actions.go)[actions.go]
> for possible actions and (state.go)[state.go] for possible state checks).

Reviewer: Fix links throughout the document, e.g.,
```suggestion
all actions and state checks we want to perform already exist (see [actions.go](actions.go)
for possible actions and [state.go](state.go) for possible state checks).
```

Then what we need to do is the following:
* Create a new test config (or decide on an existing one to reuse), see (config.go)[config.go].
The test config governs the config parameters of validators and chains that can be run in the test,

> for example we can set genesis parameters using `ChainConfig.GenesisChanges`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for example we can set the genesis parameters of a chain using `ChainConfig.GenesisChanges`.
```

> * Define a sequence of actions and state checks to perform for our test case.

Reviewer: Provide an example of this.

Author: Done, please resolve if you think it is sufficient

> * Add our test case in the main file (main.go)[main.go].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add the new test case to the main file (main.go)[main.go].
```
Also, add the specific place where to add this new test case. Maybe add some code block or something.

Author: Thanks, done!

Author: Perfect, done.

For most steps, we can reuse existing code, for example
the actions necessary to start a provider and multiple consumer chains
are already "packaged together" and available as
`stepsStartChains` in (steps_start_chains.go)[steps_start_chains.go].

> An important node is that the parts of the state that are *not* defined are
> just *not checked*. For example, 
> if the balance of a validator isn't listed in a state, it doesn't mean that we want to check
> that the validator balance is absent in the actual system, it means we
> don't care about the balance of that validator in this particular state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** The parts of the state that are *not* defined are just *not checked*. 
For example, if the balance of a validator is not listed in a state, it means we
do not care about the balance of that validator in this particular state.
```

### How to use relayers

For relayers, there are currently several actions defined.
There are some subtleties here.

* `addChainToRelayer` gives the relayer the config for the chain and should be called before the relayer is expected to interact with the chain for the first time.
* `createIbcClientsAction`, `addIbcConnectionAction` and `addIbcChannel` are used to create clients, connections and channels.
* `relayPackets` relays all *currently queued* packets and their acknowledgements.
* `startRelayer` starts the relayer, which means from now on, it will *automatically relay all packets*.
Before `startRelayer`, it's possible to let packets queue up and not clear them.
Afterwards, *all packets* will be relayed immediately, so it's no longer possible
to e.g. delay the relaying of a packet.

## Defining new actions

> When we want to test something that does not yet have a corresponding action,
> for example if a feature adds a new transaction to submit on chain and
> there exists no action yet that submits such a tx,
> it's necessary to define a new action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is necessary to define new actions when we want to test something that does not yet have the corresponding actions defined.
For example, a new feature may introduce new transactions and there are no actions to submit these transactions to the chain.
```

You can see the basic template for how to do this by looking at the actions in
(actions.go)[actions.go].

> The basic principle is to use exec.Command to execute a docker exec to execute a
> command inside the docker container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The basic principle is to use `exec.Command` to execute a command inside the docker container.
```

The pattern for this looks something like this:
```
cmd := exec.Command("docker", "exec", 
    tr.containerConfig.InstanceName,
    tr.chainConfigs[action.Chain].BinaryName,
    "the command to execute, for example tx",
    "argument 1",
    "argument 2")
output, err := cmd.CombinedOutput()
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err, "\n", string(bz))
}

// potentially check something in the output, or log something, ...
```

> Remember that actions don't need to check that the state was modified correctly,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** Actions don't need to check that the state was modified correctly,
```

since we have the state checks for this.
Still, it's generally a good idea to do a basic check for errors,
since in case the action encounters an error,
we'd rather fail inside the action and immediately know something went wrong,
rather than just getting a non-matching state during the state check that happens after the action.

### Gas

> When submitting txs, generally either specify a large enough amount of gas manually,

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
When submitting transactions, generally either specify a large enough amount of gas manually,
```

or use `--gas=auto` with a large `--gas-adjustment`.
You should avoid situations where transactions non-deterministically sometimes

> work and sometimes fail due to gas, as can happen with `--gas=auto` and no `--gas-adjustment`.

Reviewer: Why is gas consumption non-deterministic? This seems like an important aspect of our e2e testing framework (and probably a reason for our tests sometimes failing). Could you please expand on this section?

Author: I don't know why, but you can verify it - run a testnet, then try submitting the same tx again and again with --gas=auto and --gas-adjustment=1. Occasionally, the tx will run out of gas.

I used this script to run a tx again and again:
https://gist.github.com/p-offtermatt/10e128af413fe784f13e1684cd9e8d3e

Here is the relevant output:
```
sh-5.2# ./script.sh 
Running iteration ...
gas estimate: 116693
The string 'out of gas' was found in the output of the second command.
code: 11 codespace: sdk data: "" events: - attributes: - index: true key: fee value: "" - index: true key: fee_payer value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm type: tx - attributes: - index: true key: acc_seq value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm/88 type: tx - attributes: - index: true key: signature value: iejhQ2WHASJr+AgdqITu27ut9i12F/OBsU8piGtR1PseJgCji0eYEAVn15HwFR1gcFUtfFbUp7QTp/n4fW1r4Q== type: tx gas_used: "117243" gas_wanted: "116693" height: "2159" info: "" logs: [] raw_log: 'out of gas in location: WritePerByte; gasWanted: 116693, gasUsed: 117243: out of gas' timestamp: "2023-12-07T08:56:15Z" tx: '@type': /cosmos.tx.v1beta1.Tx auth_info: fee: amount: [] gas_limit: "116693" granter: "" payer: "" signer_infos: - mode_info: single: mode: SIGN_MODE_DIRECT public_key: '@type': /cosmos.crypto.secp256k1.PubKey key: AsFC8tmbGGQSHthsVStbsQ13/+Yza9IT8KCSXXEN7y9f sequence: "88" tip: null body: extension_options: [] memo: "" messages: - '@type': /cosmos.staking.v1beta1.MsgDelegate amount: amount: "500" denom: stake delegator_address: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm validator_address: cosmosvaloper19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddtrgtng non_critical_extension_options: [] timeout_height: "0" signatures: - iejhQ2WHASJr+AgdqITu27ut9i12F/OBsU8piGtR1PseJgCji0eYEAVn15HwFR1gcFUtfFbUp7QTp/n4fW1r4Q== txhash: B8A69A9F51F8458DFFA051974535984356FFE924C5ED3A90B6813E8FE076E860
sh-5.2# ./script.sh 
Running iteration ...
gas estimate: 132915
The string 'out of gas' was not found in the output of the second command.
code: 0 codespace: "" data: 122D0A2B2F636F736D6F732E7374616B696E672E763162657461312E4D736744656C6567617465526573706F6E7365 events: - attributes: - index: true key: fee value: "" - index: true key: fee_payer value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm type: tx - attributes: - index: true key: acc_seq value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm/89 type: tx - attributes: - index: true key: signature value: fqzV7aFZNtrcV489RqFrPyAuTKsHbSNUgKdsLooQjWQPGHjZDw6PwaI1Bh4ubesYA25/WDYmGxnQ9RH/ccOXVA== type: tx - attributes: - index: true key: action value: /cosmos.staking.v1beta1.MsgDelegate - index: true key: sender value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm - index: true key: module value: staking type: message - attributes: - index: true key: spender value: cosmos1jv65s3grqf6v6jl3dp4t6c9t9rk99cd88lyufl - index: true key: amount value: 1383stake type: coin_spent - attributes: - index: true key: receiver value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm - index: true key: amount value: 1383stake type: coin_received - attributes: - index: true key: recipient value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm - index: true key: sender value: cosmos1jv65s3grqf6v6jl3dp4t6c9t9rk99cd88lyufl - index: true key: amount value: 1383stake type: transfer - attributes: - index: true key: sender value: cosmos1jv65s3grqf6v6jl3dp4t6c9t9rk99cd88lyufl type: message - attributes: - index: true key: amount value: 1383stake - index: true key: validator value: cosmosvaloper19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddtrgtng - index: true key: delegator value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm type: withdraw_rewards - attributes: - index: true key: spender value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm - index: true key: amount value: 500stake type: coin_spent - attributes: - index: true key: receiver value: cosmos1fl48vsnmsdzcv85q5d2q4z5ajdha8yu34mf0eh - index: true key: amount value: 500stake type: coin_received - attributes: - index: true key: validator value: cosmosvaloper19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddtrgtng - index: true key: amount value: 500stake - index: true key: new_shares value: "500.000000000000000000" type: delegate gas_used: "130958" gas_wanted: "132915" height: "2161" info: "" logs: - events: - attributes: - key: action value: /cosmos.staking.v1beta1.MsgDelegate - key: sender value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm - key: module value: staking type: message - attributes: - key: spender value: cosmos1jv65s3grqf6v6jl3dp4t6c9t9rk99cd88lyufl - key: amount value: 1383stake type: coin_spent - attributes: - key: receiver value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm - key: amount value: 1383stake type: coin_received - attributes: - key: recipient value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm - key: sender value: cosmos1jv65s3grqf6v6jl3dp4t6c9t9rk99cd88lyufl - key: amount value: 1383stake type: transfer - attributes: - key: sender value: cosmos1jv65s3grqf6v6jl3dp4t6c9t9rk99cd88lyufl type: message - attributes: - key: amount value: 1383stake - key: validator value: cosmosvaloper19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddtrgtng - key: delegator value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm type: withdraw_rewards - attributes: - key: spender value: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm - key: amount value: 500stake type: coin_spent - attributes: - key: receiver value: cosmos1fl48vsnmsdzcv85q5d2q4z5ajdha8yu34mf0eh - key: amount value: 500stake type: coin_received - attributes: - key: validator value: cosmosvaloper19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddtrgtng - key: amount value: 500stake - key: new_shares value: "500.000000000000000000" type: delegate log: "" msg_index: 0 raw_log: '[{"msg_index":0,"events":[{"type":"message","attributes":[{"key":"action","value":"/cosmos.staking.v1beta1.MsgDelegate"},{"key":"sender","value":"cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm"},{"key":"module","value":"staking"}]},{"type":"coin_spent","attributes":[{"key":"spender","value":"cosmos1jv65s3grqf6v6jl3dp4t6c9t9rk99cd88lyufl"},{"key":"amount","value":"1383stake"}]},{"type":"coin_received","attributes":[{"key":"receiver","value":"cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm"},{"key":"amount","value":"1383stake"}]},{"type":"transfer","attributes":[{"key":"recipient","value":"cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm"},{"key":"sender","value":"cosmos1jv65s3grqf6v6jl3dp4t6c9t9rk99cd88lyufl"},{"key":"amount","value":"1383stake"}]},{"type":"message","attributes":[{"key":"sender","value":"cosmos1jv65s3grqf6v6jl3dp4t6c9t9rk99cd88lyufl"}]},{"type":"withdraw_rewards","attributes":[{"key":"amount","value":"1383stake"},{"key":"validator","value":"cosmosvaloper19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddtrgtng"},{"key":"delegator","value":"cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm"}]},{"type":"coin_spent","attributes":[{"key":"spender","value":"cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm"},{"key":"amount","value":"500stake"}]},{"type":"coin_received","attributes":[{"key":"receiver","value":"cosmos1fl48vsnmsdzcv85q5d2q4z5ajdha8yu34mf0eh"},{"key":"amount","value":"500stake"}]},{"type":"delegate","attributes":[{"key":"validator","value":"cosmosvaloper19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddtrgtng"},{"key":"amount","value":"500stake"},{"key":"new_shares","value":"500.000000000000000000"}]}]}]' timestamp: "2023-12-07T08:56:17Z" tx: '@type': /cosmos.tx.v1beta1.Tx auth_info: fee: amount: [] gas_limit: "132915" granter: "" payer: "" signer_infos: - mode_info: single: mode: SIGN_MODE_DIRECT public_key: '@type': /cosmos.crypto.secp256k1.PubKey key: AsFC8tmbGGQSHthsVStbsQ13/+Yza9IT8KCSXXEN7y9f sequence: "89" tip: null body: extension_options: [] memo: "" messages: - '@type': /cosmos.staking.v1beta1.MsgDelegate amount: amount: "500" denom: stake delegator_address: cosmos19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddwhu7lm validator_address: cosmosvaloper19pe9pg5dv9k5fzgzmsrgnw9rl9asf7ddtrgtng non_critical_extension_options: [] timeout_height: "0" signatures: - fqzV7aFZNtrcV489RqFrPyAuTKsHbSNUgKdsLooQjWQPGHjZDw6PwaI1Bh4ubesYA25/WDYmGxnQ9RH/ccOXVA== txhash: 9C779C063F76FAF14964A167D361C311B42449519A5DFCAF4F19456DFE5C556B
```

I expanded the section a bit, please take another look. I'm not sure if there is anything specifically you would like to see here, if so, let me know

Reviewer: The section is good. @MSalopek do you have more context on the non-determinism. It's really intriguing

### Waiting for blocks/time

To wait for blocks to be produced or for time to pass,
you should avoid writing your own logic, and reuse the existing
utility functions `testConfig.waitBlocks` and `testConfig.WaitTime`.
These already take care of subtleties, like `WaitTime` working with
(CometMock)[https://github.com/informalsystems/CometMock] to
advance the time instead of sleeping.

## Defining new state checks

When we want to check a part of the state that was never accessed before, it
might be necessary to define a new state check.

> This is done by adding new fields to `ChainState` in (state.go)[state.go].

Reviewer: Just a note: It could be useful to have `ChainState` an interface and define different states for different tests.

Author: My intuition is this wouldn't do much to help -
you can already have different parts of the state that matter only to certain tests
by just leaving those parts of the state unspecified in other tests.

We also need to populate the newly added fields by querying the actual system state,
which is done in `getChainState`.
Typically, this is ultimately done, like actions, by issuing commands to the chain binary
inside the docker container. See how this is done e.g. for `getBalance`.

> ## Traces

Reviewer: Add a short definition of traces.

# End-to-end testing

> 

Author: Do you think `go run ./tests/e2e/... --help` explains it properly?
I added a note to run that. If you think it's not helpful and there should be more here,
please lmk, otherwise just resolve this :)

This folder contains end-to-end tests and related infrastructure.
The goal of end-to-end tests is to test our application completely.
End-to-end in this context means tests
where the whole app (including command line interfaces, interfaces to external components like
relayers, CometBFT, etc) is in scope for testing.

> End-to-end tests should tyoically be used only to perform basic sanity checks that the provided

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
End-to-end tests should typically be used only to perform basic sanity checks that the provided
```

    but not check what chains are currently running.
* After each action, the state of the system is queried and compared against the expected state.

## Running e2e tests

If you just want to run the end-to-end tests,
see the commands in the Makefile in the repo root.

If you want to run the tests with a bit more control, see the help by running 
```go run ./tests/e2e/... --help```
in the repo root to see how to do that.

## Defining a new test case

This section explains how to define a new test case. For now, let's assume that
all actions and state checks we want to perform already exist (see [actions.go](actions.go)
for possible actions and [state.go](state.go) for possible state checks).
Then what we need to do is the following:
* Create a new test config (or decide on an existing one to reuse), see [config.go](config.go).
The test config governs the config parameters of validators and chains that can be run in the test,
for example we can set the genesis parameters of a chain using `ChainConfig.GenesisChanges`.
* Define a sequence of actions and state checks to perform for our test case.
* Add the new test case to the main file [main.go](main.go).

>     * ...in the stepChoices slice, where you need to put your step slice and the test config you want to run your steps on.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * ...in the `stepChoices` slice, where you need to put your step slice and the test config you want to run your steps on.
```

>     * ...add your test config to the testConfigs map (which is used to specify configs when calling from the CLI)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * ...add your test config to the `testConfigs` map (which is used to specify configs when calling from the CLI)
```

    * ...if your test case should run by default (if you're not sure, it probably should), also add it to the predefined test cases in

>     getTestCases (which governs which test cases will be run when no specific test case is specified on the CLI)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    `getTestCases` (which governs which test cases will be run when no specific test case is specified on the CLI)
```

For example, a short sequence of actions and state checks could look like this:
```
steps := []Step{
    Action: delegateTokensAction{
        Chain:  ChainID("provi"),
        From:   ValidatorID("alice"),
        To:     ValidatorID("alice"),
        Amount: 11000000,
    },
    State: State{
        ChainID("provi"): ChainState{
            ValPowers: &map[ValidatorID]uint{
                ValidatorID("alice"): 511,
                ValidatorID("bob"):   500,
                ValidatorID("carol"): 500,
            },
        },
    },
    Action: delegateTokensAction{
        Chain:  ChainID("provi"),
        From:   ValidatorID("alice"),
        To:     ValidatorID("bob"),
        Amount: 99000000,
    },
    State: State{
        ChainID("provi"): ChainState{
            ValPowers: &map[ValidatorID]uint{
                ValidatorID("alice"): 511,
                ValidatorID("bob"):   599,
                ValidatorID("carol"): 500,
            },
        },
    },
},
```
In this sequence, we first use the `delegateTokensAction`
to delegate 11000000 tokens from alice to herself,

> then check that alices voting power was set to 511 (note that 11000000 tokens correspond to 11 voting power here),

Reviewer 4: nit: maybe just mention this is `uatom`s? I guess that's the case right and that's why it corresponds to 11?

Before `startRelayer`, it's possible to let packets queue up and not clear them.
Afterwards, *all packets* will be relayed immediately, so it's no longer possible
to e.g. delay the relaying of a packet.

## Defining new actions

It is necessary to define new actions when we want to test something that does not yet have the corresponding actions defined.
For example, a new feature may introduce new transactions, and
there is likely no existing action to submit these transactions to the chain.

You can see the basic template for how to do this by looking at the actions in
[actions.go](actions.go).
The basic principle is to use `exec.Command` to execute a command inside the docker container.
The pattern for this looks something like this:
```
cmd := exec.Command("docker", "exec", 
    tr.containerConfig.InstanceName,
    tr.chainConfigs[action.Chain].BinaryName,
    "the command to execute, for example tx",
    "argument 1",
    "argument 2")
output, err := cmd.CombinedOutput()
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err, "\n", string(bz))
}

// potentially check something in the output, or log something, ...
```

> Don't forget to wire your action into [main.go](main.go):runStep, where

Reviewer 4: nit: Why not point direclty to the line inside `main.go` that contains`runStep`?

Author: I dislike it because it will not point to the right place anymore extremely quickly, i.e. as soon as the file is touched and this is not adjusted.
I'd be happy about suggestions on how to overcome this! I know anchors exist, but I think they make the source file a bit verbose.

the action structs and functions to run for each of them are wired together.

**Note:** Actions don't need to check that the state was modified correctly,
since we have the state checks for this.
Still, it's generally a good idea to do a basic check for errors,
since in case the action encounters an error,
we'd rather fail inside the action and immediately know something went wrong,
rather than just getting a non-matching state during the state check that happens after the action.

### Gas
When submitting transactions, generally either specify a large enough amount of gas manually,

> or use `--gas=auto` with a large `--gas-adjustment`.

Reviewer 4: Might be helpful to include here what it means for `--gas-adjustment` to be large.

* add a case for your proposal type to `json_utils.go/UnmarshalProposalWithType`
* add a generator for your proposal type in `state_rapid_test.go` and add it to the `GetProposalGen` function

### Regenerating Traces

The traces in `tracehandler_testdata` are generated by the test `trace_handlers_test.go/TestWriteExamples`.

You can regenerate them by running `make e2e-traces` in the root of the repo.

### Running against traces

To run a test trace in the e2e tests, run `go run . --test-file $TRACEFILE::$TESTCONFIG`.
See `--help` for more details.

> ## Debugging and using the e2e infrastructure to set up a testnet

Reviewer: Could we come up with some tool for debugging? For example, run a script to get the logs from the docker containers. Or to query / run transactions on the docker containers.

Author: Could be a nice idea, yeah.
I agree there is definitely some potential for quality-of-life improvements here

When something in the tests goes wrong, a nice thing about the tests is that the
docker container doesn't get killed.

> You can sh into the docker container via e.g. `docker exec -it "testinstance" sh` and manually look around,
> Useful pointers are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can sh into the docker container via e.g. `docker exec -it "testinstance" sh` and manually look around.
Useful pointers are:
```

> * Look at logs in the node homes: `/$CHAIN_ID/validator$VAL_ID`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Look at logs in the nodes' home folder, i.e., `/$CHAIN_ID/validator$VAL_ID`
```

* Query/Run txs on the running apps (find out the relevant addresses and node homes to use e.g. by running `htop "binaryname"`)

It is also possible to locally change a step so it will *always* fail (e.g. by checking for nonsense validator balances)

> and to use this to see the testnet. Alternatively, to debug an action,

Reviewer: This is not clear.

Author: Removed, since I think it wasn't helpful and the other method I outline is easier anyways

* add a case for your proposal type to `json_utils.go/UnmarshalProposalWithType`
* add a generator for your proposal type in `state_rapid_test.go` and add it to the `GetProposalGen` function

### Regenerating Traces

The traces in `tracehandler_testdata` are generated by the test `trace_handlers_test.go/TestWriteExamples`.

You can regenerate them by running `make e2e-traces` in the root of the repo.

### Running against traces

To run a test trace in the e2e tests, run `go run . --test-file $TRACEFILE::$TESTCONFIG`.
See `--help` for more details.

## Debugging and using the e2e infrastructure to set up a testnet

When something in the tests goes wrong, a nice thing about the tests is that the

> docker container doesn't get killed.

Reviewer 4: Just to verify. My understanding was that we needed to comment out `tr.teardownDocker()` in [main.go](https://github.com/cosmos/interchain-security/blob/ph/e2e-tutorial/tests/e2e/main.go#L319) so that the Docker containers do not get killed. Is that not the case?

Author: They remain present *if* a test fails. If you want them to remain always present, commenting teardownDocker does it
